Refactor casts (#325)
WebAssembly/gc: proposals/gc/MVP.md

  - note: this succeeds for all values; moreover, composing this with `extern.internalize` (in either order) yields the original value

#### Casts

> Casts work for both abstract and concrete types. In the latter case, they test of the operands RTT is a sub-RTT of the target type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Casts work for both abstract and concrete types. In the latter case, they test if the operand's RTT is a sub-RTT of the target type.
```

* `ref.test null? <heaptype>` checks whether a reference is a given heap type
  - `ref.test null? ht : [(ref null ht')] -> [i32]`
    - iff `ht <: tht` and `ht' <: tht` where `tht` is a common super type
  - if `null?` is present, returns 1 for null, otherwise 0

* `ref.cast null? <heaptype>` tries to convert to a given heap type
  - `ref.cast null? ht : [(ref null ht')] -> [(ref null2? ht)]`

>     - iff `ht <: tht` and `ht' <: tht` where `tht` is a common super type

Reviewer 2: Just for my own understanding, is `ht <: ht'` an equivalent formulation of this condition, or is there some subtlety around subsumption that I don't have right in my head?

    - and `null? = null2?`
  - traps if reference is not of requested type
  - if `null?` is present, a null operand is passed through, otherwise traps on null
  - equivalent to `(block $l (param anyref) (result (ref null? ht)) (br_on_cast null? ht $l) (unreachable))`

> * `br_on_cast <labelidx> null? <heaptype>` branches if a reference is given heap type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `br_on_cast <labelidx> null? <heaptype>` branches if a reference is a given heap type
```

>   - `br_on_cast $l null? ht : [t0* (ref null ht')] -> [t0* (ref null2? ht')]`

Reviewer 2: Should `ref null ht'` in the input type be `ref null2? ht'`?

Author: No, the input type can always allow null, analogous to other ref instructions. You may indeed want a non-null cast on an operand that you know can't actually be null, but you can't prove it to the Wasm type system.

Reviewer 2: makes sense, thanks!

    - iff `$l : [t0* t']`
    - and `(ref null3? ht) <: t'`
    - and `ht <: tht` and `ht' <: tht` where `tht` is a common super type
    - and `null? = null2? =/= null3?`
  - passes operand along with branch, plus possible extra args
  - if `null?` is present, does not branch on null, otherwise does

Note: Cast instructions allow an operand of sibling reference type, even though this cannot possibly succeed. That's because subtyping allows to forget type information and go to a common supertype, so by the subtype substitutibility property, it would be accepted in any case. The given typing rules merely allow this type to also propagate to the result, which avoids the need to compute a least upper bound between the operand type and the target type in the typing algorithm. In practice, it is sufficient to test that both types share the same top heap type.

Note: The [reference types](https://github.com/WebAssembly/reference-types) and [typed function references](https://github.com/WebAssembly/function-references)already introduce similar `ref.is_null`, `br_on_null`, and `br_on_non_null` instructions. These can now be interpreted as syntactic sugar:

> * `ref.is_null` is equivalent to `ref.test null ht`, where `tht` is the suitable bottom type (`none`, `nofunc`, or `noextern`)

Reviewer: `tht` doesn't show up before "where". Did you mean `ht`?

Same below (lines 638, 640).

> * `br_on_null` is equivalent to `br_on_cast null ht`, where `tht` is the suitable bottom type

Reviewer 2: Should "is the suitable bottom type" here instead be "is the heap type of the operand" (c.f. `ref.as_non_null` below).

Author: No, br_on_null effectively is a downcast to null, with the other side of the union being empty.

But I just realised that br_on_(non)_null do not pass on the null value, so they are not exactly equivalent. Tweaked text.

  - if `null?` is present, a null operand is passed through, otherwise traps on null
  - equivalent to `(block $l (param anyref) (result (ref null? ht)) (br_on_cast null? ht $l) (unreachable))`

* `br_on_cast <labelidx> null? <heaptype>` branches if a reference has a given heap type
  - `br_on_cast $l null? ht : [t0* (ref null ht')] -> [t0* (ref null2? ht')]`
    - iff `$l : [t0* t']`
    - and `(ref null3? ht) <: t'`
    - and `ht <: tht` and `ht' <: tht` where `tht` is a common super type
    - and `null? = null3? =/= null2?`
  - passes operand along with branch under target type, plus possible extra args
  - if `null?` is present, branches on null, otherwise does not

* `br_on_cast_fail <labelidx> null? <heaptype>` branches if a reference does not have a given heap type
  - `br_on_cast_fail $l null? ht : [t0* (ref null ht')] -> [t0* (ref null2? ht)]`
    - iff `$l : [t0* t']`
    - and `(ref null3? ht') <: t'`
    - and `ht <: tht` and `ht' <: tht` where `tht` is a common super type
    - and `null? = null2? =/= null3?`
  - passes operand along with branch, plus possible extra args
  - if `null?` is present, does not branch on null, otherwise does

> Note: Via subsumption to a common supertype, `ref.test` and `ref.cast` actually allow an operand of sibling reference type, even though this cannot possibly succeed. In the case of the branch instruction, this has to be made explicit, though, since the type also occurs in result position. The given typing rules allow this type to also propagate to the result, which avoids the need to compute a least upper bound between the operand type and the target type in the typing algorithm (allowing so is required to maintain subtype substitutability). In practice, it is sufficient to test that both types share the same top heap type.

Reviewer 3: I don't understand the second or third sentences of this note. What has to be made explicit and what type are they referring to?

Reviewer 2: @rossberg to be honest, it might be better to go back to the previous formulation of the side condition, even though `ref.test` and `ref.cast` can have a simpler formulation than `br_on_*`, just to avoid needing to explain that the conditions for all three instructions are "really" the same.

Author: Okay, I reverted the condition and simplified the note accordingly. Dropped the bit about the lub, since it is somewhat tangential and probably more confusing than helpful.

| 0xfb20 | `i31.new` |  |
| 0xfb21 | `i31.get_s` |  |
| 0xfb22 | `i31.get_u` |  |
| 0xfb40 | `ref.test ht` | `ht : heaptype` |
| 0xfb41 | `ref.cast ht` | `ht : heaptype` |
| 0xfb42 | `br_on_cast $l ht` | `$l : labelidx`, `ht : heaptype` |
| 0xfb43 | `br_on_cast_fail $l ht` | `$l : labelidx`, `ht : heaptype` |

> | 0xfb40 | `ref.test null ht` | `ht : heaptype` |

Reviewer: Did you mean `0xfb50..0xfb53` for this and the next three? Another good option would be the 48..4b range for the `null`-enabled set.

(You may be tempted to use the range 44..47, but that is [currently](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14xWenN0lUoHa9TiDJd8yYR8ZKjgOhgO7iEmfrAuA1_M/edit#) in use in implementations, and we have a requirement not to cause breakage in the ongoing test coverage of our prototyping partners, so repurposing those would cause some logistical overhead because we'd have to do a back-and-forth migration dance, so I'd prefer to use a range that's currently not in use. Since we'll sort/compact/cleanup the encoding space before finalizing the proposal anyway, it's acceptable to have cases of minor ugliness for the time being, such as non-contiguous ranges for similar instructions.
For reference, you can always look up what prototype implementations across the stack (J2Wasm, Kotlin-Wasm, Dart2Wasm, Binaryen, V8, and I believe Spidermonkey too) are doing at https://bit.ly/3cWcm6Q, we've been keeping that link stable for the past 2.5 years and will continue to keep it. Links to drafts for updated versions, like the one linked above, are always at the top of that main document.)
